[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Biohacking, it's not
just about being well,
it's about being more than well.
It's the power to
transform yourself.
Are we ready?
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is Biohacking.
Hi, I'm Dave Asprey, the
Father of Biohacking.
I created the biohacking
movement more than 10 years ago
so that we could all have
control over our own biology
because my body wasn't doing
what I wanted it to do.
In this episode, I'll
teach you about hacks
to improve the
quality of your sleep.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My sleep was terrible.
I would go to bed.
I started sleeping with a
monitor about 15 years ago,
and I would get 5 minutes
of deep sleep per night.
You want at least 90 minutes.
And I would just always
wake up feeling almost
like I hadn't slept.
And it turns out I had
terrible sleep hygiene,
but no one talked about
hacking your sleep.
There wasn't such a thing.
And as I started
getting data, I looked
at what I could do to
change my sleep quality.
I interviewed all the
experts in the field,
and here's what's going on.
Your lack of quality sleep
accelerates your aging.
Just one good night of sleep
can improve your ability
to learn new motor
skills by about 20%.
In other words, if you're
learning basketball or ping
pong or whatever it
is, 20% improvement,
that goes for your
teenagers too.
And getting regular
quality sleep
increases your ability
to gain new insight
into complex problems by 50%.
I can do what I do as the leader
of the biohacking movement
because I learned
how to sleep better,
so I can get all this
information, I can crunch it.
But if you take away my good
quality sleep for a week,
I'm kind of useless.
It turns out that sleep also
improves your skin health.
It makes you look younger.
And one night of bad sleep
impairs glucose control.
Even if you slept 8 hours,
if it was poor quality sleep,
the next day you could
look like a prediabetic.
And that same meal that was
fine the day before, now
puts you in a blood sugar spike.
And if you get less
than six hours of sleep,
your hunger hormones change.
Your ghrelin, which
is the hunger hormone,
increases, and leptin, which
is the fullness hormone,
goes down.
Scientists also recently
discovered a new organ system
in the body called
the glymphatic system,
and this is the way your brain
gets rid of waste products.
So every night while
you're sleeping your body
uses mitochondrial energy
to pump cerebrospinal fluid
into your brain, and then it
washes all the brain toxins
out, and then it
flushes them out.
So if you don't
have enough sleep,
the neurotoxins that
build up during the day
stay in your brain.
One of the things
that gets cleared
by your glymphatic system
is amyloid proteins
that are the hallmark of
Alzheimer's when they build up
in your brain.
So when you get good quality
sleep with 90 minutes of deep
sleep and 90 minutes
of REM sleep--
and I'll define those for you so
you know what they are and how
to get them--
magically you don't need 8
hours of sleep per night.
In fact, you might
not like this,
but studies show, three
studies of millions
of people over
multiple years, show
that the people who
live the longest
sleep 6.5 hours per night.
And that's not because
you should sleep less
to live longer, it's because
healthy people need less sleep.
So if you need 9 hours a
night, it means it's time
to become better at
sleeping and maybe
listen to all of the
different episodes,
so you can figure out how to
make your health more vibrant.
Every night when you're asleep
you cycle through REM and nREM
sleep.
And nREM is nonREM sleep.
And there are three
types of that.
There's stage 1 is light sleep.
Stage 2 is middle sleep.
And stage 3 is deep delta sleep.
The most important
things to know
are if you get REM, the
dreaming state, and deep sleep,
if you get those two
things, you've pretty much
had a good night's sleep.
That stage 3 deep sleep is
when your breathing and heart
rate dropped to
the lowest level,
your brainwaves slow
down and get wider.
It's called delta brain waves.
It's during that
delta brain wave time
that your glymphatic
system kicks in,
and it cleans your brain out.
And when I say it cleans
it out, your cells
in the brain literally shrink.
They excrete water
full of toxins,
and then they suck in new water.
So it's like changing
the tank in your aquarium
except inside your brain
every single night.
And it's amazing we
didn't know about this
until about a decade ago.
That slow wave sleep, it
reduces stress hormones,
it triggers the release of
immune system supporting
hormones.
And unless you do something
about it, as you age,
the amount of time you spend
in deep sleep goes down.
And that goal, again, is an
hour and a half of REM sleep
and an hour and a
half of deep sleep.
So let's talk about circadian
rhythm and what that is
and how it's signaled
because biohacking
is the art of changing
the environment around you
and inside of you so
you have full control
over your own biology.
Well, what in the environment
around you is controlling you?
Why don't you change
that so then your body
will do what you want it to do.
Your eyes have something called
melanopsin receptors in them.
Light goes into your eyes, and
you think you see all the light
because you're watching
this right now,
but 5% of the light
that went into your eyes
went around your visual
cortex into the timing system
of your brain, which is called
the super charismatic nucleus
or the SCN.
This is your body's
central controller
that tells every part
of your body, hey,
this is what time
it is right now.
So if you have
sleep issues, it's
very likely that you have a
problem with circadian timing.
Well, what sets your
circadian timing?
It turns out that light is
a major and most important
contributor to
circadian dysfunction.
It's more important
than many other things
that people might think
matter that do matter.
But if you, say,
control when you
have dinner because
you think it's
going to make you sleep
better, but then you
get the wrong light
exposure, the light
trumps the food timing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For light, it's the
intensity, it's the color,
and it's the angle of the
light coming into your eyes.
Those little cells in here
are looking at those things
because 2 billion
years ago when we
were mitochondria
floating in the ocean
and another kind of cell,
well, in the morning,
the sun came up at a certain
color and you had sunrise.
And then in the
middle of the day,
we had bright sunlight
right overhead
with full spectrum colors.
And that was when
there was the most
food available
because we were eating
algae and things like that.
And then at night, we
had more red color.
And so our bodies are still
acting like we're that,
and that's annoying.
So what are we're
going to do about that?
We're going to
change the lighting.
What that means
is that blue light
during the day from the sun
can help wake you up, keep
you alert, and improve
mood because there
is no blue light in the
morning or at night.
What that also means, though, is
that if you overexpose yourself
to blue light, you can
get brain stress from that
because those little
cells are trying
to figure out what time it is.
They don't like it when there's
a bright LED right overhead,
but it's 6:00 AM or 6:00
PM because that's not
where the sun should be, and
it creates a timing mismatch.
So one of the things you can
do that is really powerful
is you can get morning sunlight.
What that means is as
soon as you wake up,
you have your cup of
coffee with minerals in it,
and go outside, Take
off your glasses,
take off your contact lenses
and get some morning sunlight.
20 minutes is all it takes.
That morning light will
tell your mitochondria,
tell your brain, tell your
SCN, hey, it's morning time.
And at night you will get
better sleep in less time
because of what you
did in the morning.
It actually helps you
to make serotonin,
which is known as the
happiness chemical,
and that helps you make
more melatonin at night
because melatonin is
made out of serotonin.
The newer artificial
lights like LEDs
and compact
fluorescent bulbs, they
don't have any infrared light.
They have very little
violet and red light that's
found in the sun, so they are
the equivalent of junk light.
Big food companies
tried to tell you
that high fructose corn syrup
was the same thing as sugar.
But sugar does something
different to your body
even though they
both taste sweet.
You look at light
from an LED bulb,
and magically, you're not seeing
the same thing as sunlight.
And your body knows
the difference,
and it does create a
stress, and it does mess
with your circadian rhythm.
And that's why at night
it's particularly important
that you turn down or turn
off that kind of lighting.
We're getting a huge
amount of that light
during the day from screens,
and normally, your pineal gland
starts releasing melatonin
a few hours before bed.
And if you get even 5 seconds
of blue light from, say,
bright LED lights in your
kitchen or your bathroom,
it messes with that system
because it stimulates
intrinsically photosensitive
retinal ganglion cells called
ipRGCs in your retina.
Those light sensors send light
info to the circadian clock,
and then your body says,
well, in 2 billion years
of evolution, there's never
been a source of light
like this except for
sunlight, therefore, it
can't be nighttime, therefore
the clock is scrambled.
Blue light before bed
suppresses melatonin the most,
but there are four other
colors of light that affect it.
And that is why blue
blockers before bed
don't work very
well, and that's also
why blue blockers during the
day are too much because you
need some blue light to wake
up and be happy during the day.
The glasses I'm wearing
now are not blue blockers,
they're partial blue
blockers because they
allow my brain to relax but
still get enough blue light.
If you work indoors all the
time or you have headaches,
you might consider partial
blue blockers like.
That you can get a 75% boost
in your melatonin levels
just by removing bright
lights especially
LED lights and blue
lights at night.
Blue light at night from
normal white LED bulbs
is linked to rapid aging,
it stresses mitochondria
in your eyes, and it leads to
widespread metabolic problems
and inflammation.
So when your timing
system is off the,
timing system tells
your cells when
they should be making
energy versus when they
should be repairing things.
And if you scramble it by
brushing your teeth before bed
under bright lights,
is it any wonder
that you have metabolic
dysregulation that's
even correlated with diabetes?
One study found that adults
who were exposed to blue light
while eating in the evening had
higher glucose levels, slower
metabolisms even than
those who ate in dim light.
Get a dimmer switch
or get some candles,
that's what I do when I eat.
People exposed to lots
of blue light at night
have higher risk of cancer.
Blue light exposure
is linked to obesity
and other metabolic disorders.
We also have this
problem that blue light
leads to macular degeneration.
More than 11 million
people over age 60
have some form of
this visual problem.
So I keep saying blue light,
but what am I talking about?
I'm talking about LED lights
because all of the lights that
have white spectrum in them
are actually blue LEDs modified
with coatings to have
less blue, but they still
have way more blue
than sunshine.
So if you look at a light
and it's an LED light,
there is no guarantee
that your body
is going to respond the same
way as it would from sunlight.
In fact, we know that it won't.
The colors that affect your
circadian rhythm are blue light
obviously, yellow light, green
light, and violet light all
will stop you from
getting quality sleep.
This is why my house
has dimmer switches,
and we have red
nightlights at night
because with those you
can still go to sleep.
It's important to note, though,
that bright lights, even
if they're red will affect
your circadian rhythm,
but the color of the
light is very important.
Once this biohacking
knowledge becomes commonplace,
we are going to change the
way we do lighting in cities.
With the exterior
lighting like streetlights
you can make them
a warmer frequency,
and then birds
don't die as much,
insects don't die
as much, and people
who are outdoors at
night can go to bed.
We're going to change the
lighting inside our homes
as well.
In the meantime, it's up to
you to get dimmer switches
in your bathroom or just have
a little plug-in red LED bulb.
Red LEDs are just fine as long
as they're not super bright.
You have billions of
ancient bacteria embedded
in your body trying
to figure out
what's going on around you
before you can even think.
They know that if there's a
little white or a little green
LED or a little blue LED, that
it must be daytime because
in all of our evolution there
never has been such a thing.
And they're exquisitely
light sensitive.
Even though you might not see
them, they're still doing that.
If you were to take a little
bit of black electrical tape
and you were to cover all
the LEDs in your bedroom
or better yet unplug them so
that it's completely blacked
out, you will sleep better
because your body will
relax more, you'll get
more sleep in less time.
And get some blackout
curtains that actually work.
They need to be
blacking out the room.
They should have
Velcro around the edges
so that truly no
light gets through.
There was a study
in Japan of 800 men
and showed a 75%
increase in depression
from the amount of light that
comes around the curtains
at the edges in an
average city at night.
Let me say that again,
75% increase in depression
from normal city lighting
levels coming around curtains.
That means you have control
over your environment.
You can make a one-time
change in the window coverings
in your bedroom and tape
over the little lights,
and you will get better
sleep every night as long
as you sleep in that room.
It is one of the simplest
things you could ever
do to improve your
metabolic quality of life.
This is why biohacking
is so powerful.
You change your
environment around you,
and you get better sleep
without any effort.
The other thing that
you might want to do
is roll up a towel or
a blanket and put it
underneath your bedroom
door, especially in hotels.
I've stayed in lots
of hotels where
it's like a spotlight
coming under the door.
You want to sleep in
a cave because that's
where your body feels
safest, in a dark cave.
And you could use candles,
or even the little warm
led candles can be just
fine but you want dim
and you want warm frequencies.
You also can consider glasses
like the ones I'm wearing.
And you can just google
Dave Asprey glasses.
All the details are out there.
And these are controlling
the color, the angle
and the brightness.
And I've managed to completely
eliminate jet lag by using
the right color of glasses.
Now, when it comes
to sleep temperature,
this is another big signal.
If you go back to this story
about mitochondria floating
in the ocean 2
billion years ago,
well, they knew that when the
sun first came up, it was cool.
And then it got
warmer and warmer
and brighter and brighter, and
there was more and more food.
And then as the sun started to
set, it got cooler and cooler,
and there was less and less
food until it got to be dark.
And if you change the
temperature at which you sleep,
you can get up to
40% more deep sleep,
and you can fall
asleep 20% faster.
Those are huge
numbers because you
go to sleep for a third of your
life, unless you're like me
and you only get
6.5 hours a night
because that's all you need.
Still, that's a large
percentage of your life
so let's do it
40% better, right?
In order to improve
your deep sleep,
you want to make it
colder and cooler
at the beginning of the night,
the first half of the night.
And then for the second
half of the night,
you want it to be at exactly
comfortable temperature, not
warm, not cold.
And you can get special mattress
pads or bedding equipment that
controls the
temperature, and you
can get things that
turn the thermostat down
before you go to bed.
Studies show between
60 and 67 degrees
Fahrenheit is the ideal
temperature at least
for the first half of the night.
You might turn it up a
couple of degrees after that.
Clearly, you don't want
to wake up to do that.
So you get a system
that will automatically
change the temperature as you
go through your sleep cycles.
You will find profound changes
in how you feel in the morning.
And if you're worried
about being cold,
you won't be cold after
the first night or two.
It's like having a cool
pillow under your head.
You know it always feels
nice and refreshing,
your whole mattress
feels that way.
And that incredible
sensation when you wake up
after getting 40% more
deep sleep the night
before so your brain
could flush out toxins
because your
mattress was cooler,
yes, you can actually do that.
Or maybe you just turn your
thermostat down, either one
works.
One of the things that happens
at night when melatonin gets
released is that the
insulin-producing cells
in your pancreas shut down.
What that means is that as
soon as melatonin turns on,
which happens as
the sun goes down,
is that your body's insulin
response doesn't work
very well so you
get a blood glucose
spike which can cause
an adrenaline rush
and it keeps you awake.
If you wake up at
3:00 to 5:00 AM,
and you have racing
thoughts, you
can't go back to
sleep, that's probably
what's happening because your
body ran out of blood sugar
because you had a blood
sugar spike because you
ate too late, then a crash.
During the crash, you got
cortisol and adrenaline
and that got your
blood sugar back up,
but unfortunately, it also kept
you from going back to sleep.
So addressing your blood sugar
issues could change everything.
Another common
problem is caffeine.
I am the world's
biggest fan of coffee.
I've started two major
coffee companies.
I stopped drinking
caffeine at 2:00 PM,
and I switched to decaf then.
Because for most people,
you'll have cleared out
enough caffeine before
bedtime, and that's just fine.
Maybe 10% of people are
very sensitive to caffeine,
and you either need
to stop earlier or not
even drink caffeine.
But for most of us that works.
Espresso at dinner
even if you can still
go to sleep the sleep,
won't be very good.
Most fitness trackers
today will track sleep
so you can get the data.
Everything I'm
saying here has been
validated on hundreds
of thousands of people.
It gets a bit
confusing because you
know you want to stay away
from large meals near bedtime.
I've asked you to stop eating
when the sun goes down ideally,
but you do need energy
to sleep because remember
that glymphatic system
we talked about?
Well, that needs energy to
pump clean fluids in and out
of your brain.
So that cortisol boost between
3:00 to 5:00 AM is hackable,
and I want you to
understand this.
Here are some things you can
try if this happens to you.
One of them is you could
try 1 teaspoon of C8 MCT oil
in warm tea.
You blend it in there,
and you drink it.
The reason for this is that MCT
oil is a backup energy source
specifically for the brain.
You also could try adding
some grass fed collagen
or some glycine amino acid.
And those things
about a tablespoon
can have a profound effect
on your energy levels
when you're asleep because
you need energy to sleep well.
If those don't work, try adding
1 to 2 teaspoons of raw honey.
It has to be raw, and you
can't put it in hot tea
because that cooks the honey.
Raw honey will build something
called glycogen in your liver.
That's how your liver
stores carbohydrates.
And when your brain
asks for more sugar,
it asks the liver first.
So liver glycogen fuels the
brain before muscle glycogen
does.
Another thing that will
really harm your sleep
is if you exercise before bed.
You go to the gym, you got
bright lights in the gym,
there's lots of music,
and you're exercising.
When you exercise, it
increases your cortisol levels.
High cortisol at bedtime
equals poor quality sleep.
So don't exercise before bed.
But you could go for
a walk before bed.
Remember, walking isn't
exercise, it's movement.
Movement before bed, good.
Intense exercise
before bed, bad.
The other thing is anyone
with a sleep tracker
has already figured this
out, alcohol in any amount
is bad for sleep.
That one glass of wine
that you just have to have,
it might help you go to
sleep, but your sleep quality
will always be
trashed by alcohol.
And there are some things you
can do to help with alcohol.
I've written a lot about
that, but alcohol is just not
good for sleep.
So if your goal is
improving sleep, replace
the alcohol with something
else you like to drink.
Replace it even with
dessert if you have to.
Just don't drink if
sleep is the goal.
Also, turning off electronics
2 hours before bed
is a great goal.
I don't do that most of
the time because well, I
have stuff to do because
I'm watching a show.
But what I do is I use night
shift mode on my phone.
I change other
settings to increase
the amount of red light
that comes out of my phone.
And if I'm watching
on a bigger screen,
I will use the specific glasses
that are designed for sleep.
Changing the color of light
is really, really important.
The other thing that changes
your sleep that you probably
wouldn't think about is
the presence of Wi-Fi
especially if your Wi-Fi
router is in the same room
or near your bed.
Your body is sensitive to
electromagnetic frequencies,
and Wi-Fi does create a
stress response in your body.
You want your body to feel
like it's totally safe
and protected in a dark
cave and nothing on Earth
could touch it.
So have a little
remote control switch
that you can buy for $20
online that allows you to press
a button to turn off power,
and it turns off power
to my Wi-Fi system.
So at night, I have
a more relaxing
electromagnetic environment.
If you have your phone
in the room with you,
the screen needs to be turned
all the way down on brightness,
and it needs to be in airplane
mode at the very least.
The reason for this is that
if it's not an airplane mode,
then it's going to be pumping
out EMFs all night long
that affect your sleep.
When it comes to sleep,
there's something else
that makes a big
difference, it's
how you breathe
when you're asleep.
Sleep apnea is a major
problem because it puts you
at risk of other diseases.
But if you don't have
apnea and you snore a lot,
that puts you at risk
of developing diabetes,
obesity, and high
blood pressure.
And you wouldn't imagine
this but sometimes
mitochondrial dysfunction
is a cause of snoring.
There's a little
hack that I really
want you to know about because
it can change your life.
And what you do is you use
sleep tape on your mouth.
So you close your mouth,
you put a little bit of tape
right here, just right
under your nose that gently
holds your lips together.
So when you're sleeping,
your mouth is closed,
your body will breathe
through your nose.
You might say, but I can't
breathe through my nose.
Your body has a reflex
to open up your sinuses
when your mouth is closed.
You get more nitric oxide,
way more oxygen in the brain,
and you feel better
in the morning.
You don't get cavities.
You don't get morning breath.
It is a profound difference.
You also might consider
using a custom bite guard.
As you age, you grind
down your rear molars,
and it changes the
angle of your bite.
And it turns out having
lower teeth in the back,
especially if you grind and
clench changes the stress
on the trigeminal nerve, which
changes your fight or flight
nerve called the vagal nerve.
So what I do at night,
I put in a bite guard,
I put a piece of tape on the
front, and I sleep way better,
and I don't interfere
with my partner
because I don't snore because
my mouth is taped shut.
There are millions of people
who tape their mouths now,
and it just makes so many
parts of your life better.
It is so simple,
highly recommended.
Another thing that works
well for some people
is a nasal dilator.
There are things that fit
right inside the entrance
to your nose.
They are silicone rings.
They last for a long time.
And you put that in before you
go to bed, and you don't snore,
and you breathe better.
Allowing your body to get
oxygen when you're asleep
is a pretty good
investment for biohacking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
People also ask, hey, what's
the best sleep position?
Well, according to
Dr. Peter Martone,
who I've interviewed
several times on my show,
his studies say that back
sleeping closes your airway.
And it's true.
A lot of people snore
worse on their back
but that the issue
is head support.
When you support
your head right,
you reinforce the wrong
curve in your neck.
When you put a regular
pillow under your head,
you're closing your airway.
See how it pushes on my head?
It goes down.
When you bring your neck back,
you can open up the airway.
When Dr. Martone
reviewed X-rays,
he found 90% of his patients
had a loss of the cervical curve
if they were side sleepers.
When you sleep on your
side, you break down
your maxilla which can
cause TMJ dysfunction.
You get the right
pillow and one that
looks at the distance between
your ear and your shoulder.
If you sleep on
your side, that's
going to be a fat pillow.
And if you sleep on your back,
it's going to be a thin pillow.
And if you wake up and your
neck is cricked like this,
it's going to inhibit that
cerebral spinal flow that is
part of the glymphatic system.
So I want you to just pay a lot
of attention to your pillow.
Enough pillow between your
shoulder and your head
if you sleep on your side.
If you sleep on your back,
you want a very thin pillow,
and you want it bunched
up under your neck.
Another hack is you can find
some cement blocks or wood
blocks and elevate the head
of the bed, just the part
where your head is,
by 5 to 7 degrees.
That's 6 inches
for a normal bed.
So 6 inch blocks under
the head of the bed.
It improves sleep quality.
It helps your brain dump toxins
with assistance from gravity,
and there are crazy studies out
of Germany showing improvements
even in things like Alzheimer's.
So yeah, my bed at home
is at a slight angle
and it works just fine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There's also the mattress.
What kind of mattress
do you want to sleep on?
Cotton or wool would be best,
but synthetics are not ideal,
even though there are so many
foam mattresses out there.
You want to get organic
latex unless you're allergic.
One of the most important
things you could do,
though, is to put a dust-proof
pillowcase on your pillows
and on your mattress
itself to seal
in whatever's in your mattress.
So many mattresses today,
especially in the US
have 6 pounds of flame
retardant chemicals
that are harmful for your body.
So you want a low-toxin
mattress or at a minimum wrap
yours in a impermeable
membrane so
that you don't have
to deal with that
and make your body do
all the extra detoxing.
You might also
consider something
called a weighted blanket.
This is a blanket
that can weigh up
to 30 pounds ideally full
of glass beads instead
of plastic beads.
And when you put
this on top of you
it's like a
noise-canceling headphones
for your whole nervous system.
It reduces the amount of time
it takes you to go to sleep.
So you lay down, put on the
weighted blanket, you're out.
It takes your body out
of fight or flight.
What you want to do is get
a blanket that's about 10%
of your body weight.
It works through pressure touch
which stimulates serotonin
like getting a hug.
So if you toss and turn
a lot, a weighted blanket
can just be a godsend.
This is, again, a one-time
affordable investment
that pays dividends every night
for the rest of your life.
I sleep with a weighted blanket.
I have for about eight years.
If you do end up getting
a foam mattress that
smells of chemicals, do
not sleep on that mattress.
You want to put it out in the
sun to get as hot as you can.
Maybe in a room with a heater
on all the way with a fan on,
and you want to bake the
chemicals out of the mattress.
It can take from two
days up to two weeks,
depending on your mattress,
until it doesn't smell anymore.
Sleeping on a mattress
that smells like foam
is going to expose you to a
huge number of toxins that can
dysregulate your mitochondria.
Should you sleep with a partner?
There are studies that
show up to 39% of people
wish they could sleep
without their partner,
and that's because of snoring
and other sleep quality issues.
You have a partner
who tosses and turns.
Maybe the hacks you've already
learned will help that.
So partner sleeping
reduces sleep quality,
but it increases
oxytocin levels.
If you sleep separately, you
have less oxytocin, less pair
bonding.
So you might want to consider
if your household allows
for that, have it a share bed.
And nights when you
really need sleep,
maybe you sleep separately.
So it doesn't have to be all
of one or all of the other.
What I want you to do
is track your sleep
and see how to get a great
night's sleep in the same bed
as your partner.
If that doesn't work, alternate.
I've mentioned sleep quality.
I've mentioned REM sleep.
I've mentioned deep sleep,
but how do you know?
Well, you can use an app on your
phone to track your sleep just
using the microphone.
It's not great, but
it's good enough.
Or you could even
go simpler than that
and just keep a journal.
In the morning when you wake up,
how did I feel when I woke up?
Were my joints sore?
Was I tired?
Was I awake?
And that can make
a big difference.
If you have a smart
watch, it probably
has reasonable sleep
tracking on it.
Any fitness monitor
likely does that already.
Your job is just to look
at it in the morning
and see how you did.
Did you get more
or less deep sleep?
or less REM sleep?
Once you have a baseline,
do any of the things
you've learned in this episode
and see how it improves.
After 15 years of tracking my
sleep data every single night,
these are the things that work.
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is Biohacking.